---
title: Does It Need to Be Immoral to Cause Harm
date: 2024-03-02
tags: ["philosophy", "politics"]
published: false
---

This is a rather off-topic post on a philosophical/political topic. [Alex O'Conner](https://www.youtube.com/@CosmicSkeptic) in [one of his videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rgHl2KcadEU), argues why homosexuality is not moral, i.e., does not have anything to do at all with morality. Well, first of all, there are varying definitions of morality for different-minded people. But since Alex is not a conservative and purely relies on reason and logic for defining morality, I would like to put more nuance to a slightly opposing view using pure reason.

I am not willing to argue why homosexuality is immoral as well. I am not homophobic either, and I do believe that everybody regardless of their sexual orientation should be treated like a fellow human being, no less than anyone else. My case against many such libertarian ideas is not concerning the morality of actions, but rather the possible consequences of actions, whether or not they are moral.

## Enter Alex's Premise for Defining Morality

Alex has defined morality based on two criteria. For any action to be considered either moral or immoral, it must satisfy the following two conditions:

1. The action must be done consciously. Unconscious acts and decisions cannot be considered moral or immoral.
2. The action must affect the well-being of individuals. Any irrelevant act that does not affect at all the well-being of any person or conscious being cannot be considered moral or immoral.

Based on this definition he argues that since homosexuality is neither a conscious decision nor does it affect the well-being of any individual, is not a subject of dialogue in morality. It is, therefore, irrelevant to argue about the morality of homosexuality.

Now let me make it clear, adhering to this definition, and in my personal opinion I completely agree that for anything to be moral it must fit this criteria, and hence it follows that homosexuality is not immoral (and moral as well).

## But "When" Must It Affect Well-Being? 

My case here is simple. Consider I decide to consume 50ml of a dilute alcoholic drink just for exploration. This act is conscious, but it does not affect my well-being, because I would not get drunk and 50ml of such a drink would have a negligible effect on my physical health. However, after I consumed the drink, the prospect that I might grow a liking for it increased significantly. The consequence of this will be that I may now try to drink 100ml of a less diluted version tomorrow. And continue doing this until I become an addict. This, again increases the possibility of me becoming an alcoholic. It is now, that my well-being has started getting affected.

However, this is an extremely unlikely scenario. But now let's make it much more relevant and serious. Again, just for the sake of curiosity, I decide to smoke a cigar. The far-fetched consequence of this is much more dangerous than alcohol.

But to make it even more serious, assume that I took a small sample of a narcotic drug from my friend because he urged me to try it once. I have a firm resolution to only try it only once and never touch it again. But the likelihood of me thinking about trying it again later in life has increased significantly ever since the first time I tried it.

All of the things I stated above start with an act that is not immoral by definition. It does not affect well-being at the moment. In fact, it does not affect well-being for a very long time, until it does, and yet only for some people. The mere possibility that something which is not moral at the moment may still cause harm in the future is why I must stay away from all three things stated above.

Now, if you're reading this article to find flaws in this logic, one trivial objection you might raise is that trying out the drug for the first time itself is immoral, not because it will affect my well-being, but because if I get intoxicated, I might cause actions that are immoral, such as car accidents. These acts would be in an unconscious state but could have been entirely avoided had I not performed the conscious act of trying out the drug in the first place. So, by this logic, trying out drugs is definitively immoral. However, the above scenarios have been provided with an assumption that I can be certain about the safety of my actions after each trial because I am in the safety of my home and not in public to be able to cause any harm. Hence, these are not direct objections to the above examples. And all the examples satisfying this assumption are undisputedly not immoral.

This is the premise of my case against things that are not immoral but can still affect well-being in the future. The premise is that everything that increases the _possibility_ of affecting well-being in future does not necessarily need to be moral (or immoral).

## Enter Homosexuality

The examples I provided to support my premise were all conscious acts and hence could have been avoided. But homosexuality is not conscious, at least as long as it is legitimate. Now, what problem do I have with homosexuality? The answer is, well, none. I don't have a problem with the phenomena of homosexuality. But I have a problem with the culture surrounding homosexuality. Now, the following arguments will deal with more personal observations and beliefs rather than reason, and I would like to inform you that first.

The thing which I have observed regarding homosexuality, and freedom of identity in general, is that it has been a very attractive place for narcissists and depressed people to find comfort in. I would like to support this argument with another example. We all know how we must treat all people with physical disabilities with care and compassion. We must not humiliate them for disabilities they do not have control of. But consider a scenario where people who are disabled become the centre of attention for a huge population. And the love and compassion and free privileges they got, became so profound that now a younger generation who has a bad upbringing and lacks good relationships and affection witnesses all this. A young girl with abusive parents and a traumatic childhood has never got any affection from anyone for her entire life. So she decides that she must deliberately amputate one of her limbs, thus enabling her to get instant empathy, attention and love wherever she goes (because that is what she has observed). This also gives her a whole new vibrant community of all such disabled people who care for each other. This is an interesting moral dilemma which seems that it should have been a psychological thriller movie plot.

I find this analogous to the increasing percentage of people trying to identify themselves with their absurd sexual orientations and behaviours and undergo various surgeries to conform to their perceived gender identity. The persistence of these people to aggressively push their identity everywhere does not seem to be originating from the will to exercise freedom of expression, but rather as a way to gain more empathy, attention, privileges and a caring community. As with any other such ideological communities, if what I have assumed here is true, we should see these people try and fight very hard to keep things in such a way that they continue to receive more attention and also to tighten their community. To do so, they would get extremely aggressive with people who _don't_ want to give special attention to them and would stick to tribalism and an "us versus them" fight to keep their community strong. Both of which can be real life, thus confirming my assumptions.

But ignoring the political consequences of such divisions of society, what other things would directly affect the well-being of individuals in the distant future (as per the premise)? One thing that always comes to my mind is the obsession of these people with sex in general. This can be seen with their overwhelmingly rigorous push to "educate" more children, and an extreme version of this becomes absolute degeneracy and drag shows for children etc. The problem is that people are so obsessed with something which does not lead to any kind of personal progress in life. If you have to constantly argue, scream, and advocate for things dealing with sexual identity, you are missing out on the real bigger problems that need to be addressed. As a matter of fact, reproduction is the only bodily function that is voluntary, meaning one can choose whether or not one wishes to participate in it. All other functions like nutrition, hydration, sleep, and rest, are compulsory for the human body. Obsessing over a voluntary action which is primarily done for pleasure is taking away your time and energy that could have been otherwise used for more meaningful purposes. This can also adversely affect mental health. The list of problems that could occur if one is obsessed with sexual pleasure and identity is not the concern of this article. But the central idea is that when this happens, a future consequence is that it will inevitably affect the well-being of society.

So what action am I actually against that poses the risk of affecting well-being? Am I against homosexuality? I repeat, I am NOT against homosexuality. I am against the advocation of an aggressive push for personal identification through gender and sex. It is not _immoral_ if you wish to "normalize" the usage of absurd pronounce or adjectives to be used to refer to yourself, but the consequence of this action may affect the future of well-being in society, even though the action itself is not the subject of morality at the moment.

## The Generality of This Notion

The notion which has been stated and re-iterated several times in this article, is my central argument against absolute freedom for individuals in society. I do advocate for individual freedoms, but I wish to consider the "consequences" of allowing certain actions even if they are not a subject of morality. This applies to several other libertarian ideas, including the ones that wish to legalize the usage of narcotic drugs. Even though rational liberals are aware of the adverse consequences of drug usage, they would rather wish to "educate" the citizens on why they shouldn't do drugs, and then leave it upon the people to take the advice instead of prosecuting those who use it. The problem here again, is that when you allow such freedom, despite education, there is going to be a small minority who will continue to propagate the consumption of drugs and people are going to fall prey to it despite knowing that it will harm them. The fundamental assumption of the libertarian ideology is that people are rational beings who would avoid detrimental action by their virtue of reason alone. Even though this is a great ideal to strive for, the reality is that people will indulge in certain actions despite knowing the detrimental consequences, because our fundamental assumption is wrong. People are not rational robots, and they make irrational decisions when you factor in the prospect of pleasure. Sometimes, the only way to stop this is societal pressure (against the normalization of ridiculous things) and regulation (laws against buying drugs).

On the flip side of my criticism, I do acknowledge that there are blind orthodox followers of certain religious beliefs that are just as irrational in arguing against homosexuality by pointing out how it is inherently immoral, and that people having the condition must be subject to punishments, through scriptures and text. I do not think homosexuality is immoral, it is not a subject of morality just like Alex said. But this is beyond the scope of this article, and I have inserted this just in case if someone wonders whether I stand by the conservative brigade, and the answer is, not quite.